Docs: Daemonset to manage Agent hostpath Permissions (#6700)
elastic/cloud-on-k8s: docs/orchestrating-elastic-stack-applications/agent-fleet.asciidoc

EOF
----
+

> <1> The root user is required to persist state in a hostPath volume and to trust the Elasticsearc CA in Fleet mode. See <<{p}_storing_local_state_in_host_path_volume>> for options to not run the Agent container as root.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> The root user is required to persist state in a hostPath volume and to trust the Elasticsearch CA in Fleet mode. See <<{p}_storing_local_state_in_host_path_volume>> for options to not run the Agent container as root.
```

              name: system
----

> *  `xpack.fleet.agents.elasticsearch.hosts`  must point to the Elasticsearch cluster where Elastic Agents should send data. For ECK-managed Elasticsearch clusters ECK creates a Service accessible through `https://ES_RESOURCE_NAME-es-http.ES_RESOURCE_NAMESPACE.svc:9200` URL, where `ES_RESOURCE_NAME` is the name of Elasticsearch resource and `ES_RESOURCE_NAMESPACE` is the namespace it was deployed within. See <<{p}_storing_local_state_in_host_path_volume>> for details on adjusting this field when running agent as non-root as it is required when running as non-root.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*  `xpack.fleet.agents.elasticsearch.hosts` must point to the Elasticsearch cluster where Elastic Agents should send data. For ECK-managed Elasticsearch clusters ECK creates a Service accessible through `https://ES_RESOURCE_NAME-es-http.ES_RESOURCE_NAMESPACE.svc:9200` URL, where `ES_RESOURCE_NAME` is the name of Elasticsearch resource and `ES_RESOURCE_NAMESPACE` is the namespace it was deployed within. See <<{p}_storing_local_state_in_host_path_volume>> for details on adjusting this field when running agent as non-root as it becomes required.
```

Please note that the environment variables related to policy selection mentioned in the Elastic Agent link:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/fleet/current/agent-environment-variables.html[docs] like `FLEET_SERVER_POLICY_ID` will be managed by the ECK operator.

[id="{p}-elastic-agent-running-as-a-non-root-user"]
// tag::configuration-example-elastic-agent-running-as-a-non-root-user[]
=== Running as a non-root user

In order to run Elastic Agent as a non-root user you must choose how you want to persist data to the Agent's volume.

1. Run Elastic Agent with an `emptyDir` volume. This has the downside of not persisting data between restarts of the Elastic Agent which can duplicate work done by the previous running Agent.

> 2. Run Elastic Agent with a `hostPath` volume in addition to a `Daemonset` running as `root` that maintains permissions for the `agent` user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Run Elastic Agent with a `hostPath` volume in addition to a `Daemonset` running as `root` that sets up permissions for the `agent` user.
```
"maintain" implies it will constantly reconcile the permissions which it will not iiic

> In addition to these decisions, if you are running Elastic Agent in Fleet mode as a non-root user you must configure Kibana to accept the CA of the Elasticsearch Cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition to these decisions, if you are running Elastic Agent in Fleet mode as a non-root user, you must configure `certificate_authorities.ssl` in each `xpack.fleet.outputs` to trust the CA of the Elasticsearch Cluster.
```
I think this sentence can be misleading. IIUC the CA must be configured in the fleet outputs configuration which is itself in the Kibana resource:

```yaml
apiVersion: kibana.k8s.elastic.co/v1
kind: Kibana
metadata:
  name: kibana
spec:
  version: 8.7.0
  count: 1
  elasticsearchRef:
    name: elasticsearch
  config:
    xpack.fleet.agents.fleet_server.hosts: ["https://fleet-server-agent-http.default.svc:8220"]
    xpack.fleet.outputs:
    - id: eck-fleet-agent-output-elasticsearch
      is_default: true
      name: eck-elasticsearch
      type: elasticsearch
      hosts: ["https://elasticsearch-es-http.default.svc:9200"]
      ssl:
        certificate_authorities: ["/mnt/elastic-internal/elasticsearch-association/default/elasticsearch/certs/ca.crt"]
```

But there is no need to change of set `elasticsearch.ssl.certificateAuthorities`.

[id="{p}-elastic-agent-fleet-known-limitations"]
== Known limitations

=== Running as root and within a single namespace (ECK < 2.8.0 and Agent < 7.14.0)

> Until version 7.14.0 and ECK 2.8.0, Elastic Agent in Fleet mode has to run as root and in the same namespace as the Elasticsearch cluster it connects to. Since ECK 2.8.0 Agent in fleet mode is required to be greater than version 7.14.0. Both the Fleet Server and the Elastic Agent are not required to run as root but there are some known issues when <<{p}_storing_local_state_in_host_path_volume>> that must be noted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Until version 7.14.0 and ECK 2.8.0, Elastic Agent in Fleet mode has to run as root and in the same namespace as the Elasticsearch cluster it connects to. Since ECK 2.8.0, Agent in Fleet mode is required to be greater than version 7.14.0. Both the Fleet Server and the Elastic Agent are not required to run as root but there are some known issues when <<{p}_storing_local_state_in_host_path_volume>> that must be noted.
```

> Until version 7.14.0 and ECK 2.8.0, Elastic Agent in Fleet mode has to run as root and in the same namespace as the Elasticsearch cluster it connects to. Since ECK 2.8.0, Agent in Fleet mode is required to be greater than version 7.14.0. Both the Fleet Server and the Elastic Agent are not required to run as root but there are some known issues when <<{p}_storing_local_state_in_host_path_volume>> that must be noted.

Reviewer 2: What does this 2.8.0 change refer to? Changes from this PR? If so we need to change it to 2.10

Author: It needed to be updated to 2.10.0. 👍

> Until version 7.14.0 and ECK 2.10.0, Elastic Agent in Fleet mode has to run as root and in the same namespace as the Elasticsearch cluster it connects to. Since ECK 2.10.0, Agent in Fleet mode is required to be greater than version 7.14.0. Both the Fleet Server and the Elastic Agent are not required to run as root but there are some known issues when <<{p}_storing_local_state_in_host_path_volume>> that must be noted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Until version 7.14.0 and ECK version 2.10.0, Elastic Agent in Fleet mode has to run as root and in the same namespace as the Elasticsearch cluster it connects to. 
```

> Due to current configuration limitations on Fleet/Elastic Agent side prior to version 7.14.0, ECK prior to version 2.10.0 needs to establish trust between Elastic Agents and Elasticsearch. ECK can fetch the required Elasticsearch CA correctly if both resources are in the same namespace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This was due to configuration limitations in Fleet/Elastic Agent. ECK needed to establish trust between Elastic Agents and Elasticsearch. ECK was only able to fetch the required Elasticsearch CA correctly if both resources are in the same namespace.

As of Elastic Stack version 7.14.0 and ECK version 2.10.0 it is also possible to run Elastic Agent and Fleet as a non-root user. See <<{p}_storing_local_state_in_host_path_volume>> for instructions.
```

[id="{p}-elastic-agent-fleet-known-limitations"]
== Known limitations

=== Running as root and within a single namespace (ECK < 2.8.0 and Agent < 7.14.0)

> Elastic Agent in Fleet mode has to run as root prior to version 7.14.0 when using ECK prior to 2.8.0, and in the same namespace as the Elasticsearch cluster it connects to. After ECK version 2.8.0 Agent in fleet mode is required to be greater than version 7.14.0. Both the Fleet Server and the Elastic Agent are not required to run as root but there are some known issues when <<{p}_storing_local_state_in_host_path_volume>> that must be noted.

Reviewer 3: I would place the version information at the beginning of both sentences:
```suggestion
Until version 7.14.0 and ECK 2.8.0, Elastic Agent in Fleet mode has to run as root and in the same namespace as the Elasticsearch cluster it connects to. Since ECK 2.8.0 Agent in fleet mode is required to be greater than version 7.14.0. Both the Fleet Server and the Elastic Agent are not required to run as root but there are some known issues when <<{p}_storing_local_state_in_host_path_volume>> that must be noted.
```

Solution: enable CNI when starting minikube: `minikube start --cni=true`.

// tag::elastic-agent-fleet-known-limitations-local-state[]

=== Storing local state in host path volume
Elastic Agent managed by ECK stores local state in a host path volume by default. This ensures that integrations run by the agent can continue their work without duplicating work that has already been done after the Pod has been recreated for example because of a Pod configuration change. Multiple replicas of an agent, for example Fleet Servers, can not be deployed on the same underlying Kubernetes node as they would try to use the same host path. There are 2 options for managing this feature:

> 1. If local state storage in `hostPath` volumes is not desired this can be turned off by configuring an `emptyDir` volume instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. If local state storage in `hostPath` volumes is not desired this can be turned off by configuring an `emptyDir` volume instead.
+
```

and get rid of the empty line below to keep the enumeration going

[source,yaml]
----
# Using an emptyDir instead of a hostPath volume.
apiVersion: agent.k8s.elastic.co/v1alpha1
kind: Agent
metadata:
  name: fleet-server
spec:
  deployment:
    podTemplate:
      spec:
        securityContext: <1>
          fsGroup: 1000
          # runAsUser: 0 <2>
        volumes:
        - name: agent-data
          emptyDir: {}
...
----
<1> Gid 1000 is the default group at which the Agent container runs. Adjust as necessary if `runAsGroup` has been modified.
<2> runAsUser: 0 can be disabled when running with an `emptyDir` as opposed to a `hostPath` volume.

> 
> [.text-left]
> 1. If local state storage is still desired but running the Agent container as root is not allowed, then you can run a `DaemonSet` that adjusts the permissions for the Agent local state on each Node prior to running Elastic Agent. *Note that this `DaemonSet` must be `runAsUser: 0` and possibly `privileged: true`*. *Also note the Kibana changes required to trust the Elasticsearch CA*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+
2. If local state storage is still desired but running the Agent container as root is not allowed, then you can run a `DaemonSet` that adjusts the permissions for the Agent local state on each Node prior to running Elastic Agent. *Note that this `DaemonSet` must be `runAsUser: 0` and possibly `privileged: true`*. *Also note the Kibana changes required to trust the Elasticsearch CA*.
```

Reviewer 2: Actually I think these examples below point 2. should be more prominent and I would move them into a new section in the `Configuration` chapter under a title like `Running as a non-root user` and the link to them from here and same for the standalone Agent. This is an important enough new "feature" if you will that we should not hide away in the hostPath limitations section.

Author: This new section has been added in both the fleet+agent, and standalone sections.

Solution: enable CNI when starting minikube: `minikube start --cni=true`.

=== Storing local state in host path volume
Elastic Agent managed by ECK stores local state in a host path volume by default. This ensures that integrations run by the agent can continue their work without duplicating work that has already been done after the Pod has been recreated for example because of a Pod configuration change. Multiple replicas of an agent, for example Fleet Servers, can not be deployed on the same underlying Kubernetes node as they would try to use the same host path. There are 2 options for managing this feature:

1. If local state storage in `hostPath` volumes is not desired this can be turned off by configuring an `emptyDir` volume instead.
2. If local state storage is still desired but running the Agent container as root is not allowed, then you can run a `DaemonSet` that adjusts the permissions for the Agent local state on each Node prior to running Elastic Agent. *Note that this `DaemonSet` must be `runAsUser: 0` and possibly `privileged: true`*. *Also note the Kibana changes required to trust the Elasticsearch CA*.

[source,yaml]
----

> # Using an emptyDir instead of a hostPath volume.

Reviewer 2: Let's put the examples after the text introducing them

apiVersion: agent.k8s.elastic.co/v1alpha1
kind: Agent
metadata:
  name: fleet-server
spec:
  deployment:
    podTemplate:
      spec:
        securityContext:
          # Gid 1000 is the default group at which the Agent container runs.
          # Adjust as necessary if `runAsGroup` has been modified.

>           fsGroup: 1000

Reviewer 2: Why not use callouts here? Comments are rendered very lightly in the current Elastic style sheet.

          - |-
            # Adjust this with /var/lib/elastic-agent/YOUR-NAMESPACE/YOUR-AGENT-NAME/state
            # Multiple directories are supported for the fleet-server + agent use case.
            dirs=(
              "/var/lib/elastic-agent/default/elastic-agent/state"
              "/var/lib/elastic-agent/default/fleet-server/state"
              )
            for dir in ${dirs[@]}; do
              mkdir -p "${dir}"
              # chcon is only required when running an an SELinux-enabled/OpenShift environment.
              # chcon -Rt svirt_sandbox_file_t "${dir}"
              chmod g+rw "${dir}"
              # Gid 1000 is the default group at which the Agent container runs. Adjust as necessary if `runAsGroup` has been modified.
              chgrp 1000 "${dir}"
              if [ -n "$(ls -A ${dir} 2>/dev/null)" ]
              then
                # Gid 1000 is the default group at which the Agent container runs. Adjust as necessary if `runAsGroup` has been modified.
                chgrp 1000 "${dir}"/*
                chmod g+rw "${dir}"/*
              fi
            done
      containers:
        - name: sleep
          image: docker.io/bash:5.2.15

>           command: ['sleep', 'infinity']

Reviewer 2: Any reason it is a bash container here when the actual recipe uses `pause` (which is better imo)?

Solution: enable CNI when starting minikube: `minikube start --cni=true`.

=== Storing local state in host path volume
Elastic Agent managed by ECK stores local state in a host path volume by default. This ensures that integrations run by the agent can continue their work without duplicating work that has already been done after the Pod has been recreated for example because of a Pod configuration change. Multiple replicas of an agent, for example Fleet Servers, can not be deployed on the same underlying Kubernetes node as they would try to use the same host path. There are 2 options for managing this feature:

1. If local state storage in `hostPath` volumes is not desired this can be turned off by configuring an `emptyDir` volume instead.

> 2. If local state storage is still desired but running the Agent container as root is not allowed, then you can can run a `DaemonSet` that adjusts the permissions for the Agent local state on each Node prior to running Elastic Agent. *Note that this `DaemonSet` must be `runAsUser: 0` and possibly `privileged: true`*. *Also note the Kibana changes required to trust the Elasticsearch CA*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. If local state storage is still desired but running the Agent container as root is not allowed, then you can run a `DaemonSet` that adjusts the permissions for the Agent local state on each Node prior to running Elastic Agent. *Note that this `DaemonSet` must be `runAsUser: 0` and possibly `privileged: true`*. *Also note the Kibana changes required to trust the Elasticsearch CA*.
```

[source,yaml]
----
# Using an emptyDir instead of a hostPath volume.
apiVersion: agent.k8s.elastic.co/v1alpha1
kind: Agent
metadata:
  name: fleet-server
spec:
  deployment:
    podTemplate:
      spec:
        securityContext:
          # Gid 1000 is the default group at which the Agent container runs.
          # Adjust as necessary if `runAsGroup` has been modified.
          fsGroup: 1000

>         # runAsUser: 0 can be disabled when running with an `emptyDir`
>         # as opposed to a `hostPath` volume.
>         # securityContext:
>           # runAsUser: 0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          # runAsUser: 0 can be disabled when running with an `emptyDir`
          # as opposed to a `hostPath` volume.
          # runAsUser: 0
```

        volumes:
        - name: agent-data
          emptyDir: {}
...
----

[source,yaml]
----
# Using a DaemonSet to manage permissions for Elastic Agent using hostPath volume.
apiVersion: agent.k8s.elastic.co/v1alpha1
kind: Agent
metadata:
  name: fleet-server-sample
  namespace: elastic-apps
spec:
  mode: fleet
  fleetServerEnabled: true
  deployment: {}
...
---
apiVersion: agent.k8s.elastic.co/v1alpha1
kind: Agent
metadata:
  name: elastic-agent-sample
  namespace: elastic-apps
spec:
  daemonSet: {}
...
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: DaemonSet
metadata:
  name: manage-agent-hostpath-permissions
  namespace: elastic-apps
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      name: manage-agent-hostpath-permissions
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        name: manage-agent-hostpath-permissions
    spec:

>       # This is only required when running in an selinux-enabled/Openshift environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      # This is only required when running in an SElinux-enabled/OpenShift environment.
```

      # Ensure this user has been added to the privileged scc in the correct namespace.
      # oc adm policy add-scc-to-user privileged -z elastic-agent -n elastic-apps
      # serviceAccountName: elastic-agent
      volumes:
        - hostPath:
            path: /var/lib/elastic-agent
            type: DirectoryOrCreate
          name: "agent-data"
      initContainers:
        - name: manage-agent-hostpath-permissions
          # UBI is only required when needing the `chcon` binary when running

>           # in an senlinux-enabled/Openshift environment. If that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          # in an SELinux-enabled/OpenShift environment. If that
```

          # is not required then the following smaller image can be used instead:
          # image: registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal:latest
          image: docker.io/bash:5.2.15
          resources:
            limits:
              cpu: 100m
              memory: 32Mi
          securityContext:

>             # privileged is only required when running in an selinux-enabled/Openshift environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            # privileged is only required when running in an SElinux-enabled/OpenShift environment.
```

            # privileged: true
            runAsUser: 0
          volumeMounts:
            - mountPath: /var/lib/elastic-agent
              name: agent-data
          command:
          - 'bash'
          - '-e'
          - '-c'
          - |-

>             # Adjust this be /var/lib/elastic-agent/YOUR-NAMESPACE/YOUR-AGENT-NAME/state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            # Adjust this with /var/lib/elastic-agent/YOUR-NAMESPACE/YOUR-AGENT-NAME/state
```

            # Multiple directories are supported for the fleet-server + agent use case.
            dirs=(
              "/var/lib/elastic-agent/default/elastic-agent/state"
              "/var/lib/elastic-agent/default/fleet-server/state"
              )
            for dir in ${dirs[@]}; do

>               if [[ ! -d "${dir}" ]]
>               then
>                 echo "creating ${dir} directory"
>                 mkdir -p "${dir}"
>               fi

Reviewer: ```suggestion
              mkdir -p "${dir}"
```

>               # chcon is only required when running an an selinux-enabled/Openshift environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
              # chcon is only required when running an an SELinux-enabled/OpenShift environment.
```

Solution: enable CNI when starting minikube: `minikube start --cni=true`.

=== Storing local state in host path volume
Elastic Agent managed by ECK stores local state in a host path volume by default. This ensures that integrations run by the agent can continue their work without duplicating work that has already been done after the Pod has been recreated for example because of a Pod configuration change. Multiple replicas of an agent, for example Fleet Servers, can not be deployed on the same underlying Kubernetes node as they would try to use the same host path. There are 2 options for managing this feature:

1. If local state storage in `hostPath` volumes is not desired this can be turned off by configuring an `emptyDir` volume instead.

> 2. If local state storage is still desired but running the Agent container as root is not allowed, then you can can run a `DaemonSet` that adjusts the permissions for the Agent local state on each Node prior to running Elastic Agent. *Note that this `DaemonSet` must be `runAsUser: 0` and possibly `privileged: true`*. *Also Note the Kibana changes required to trust the Elasticsearch CA*

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. If local state storage is still desired but running the Agent container as root is not allowed, then you can can run a `DaemonSet` that adjusts the permissions for the Agent local state on each Node prior to running Elastic Agent. *Note that this `DaemonSet` must be `runAsUser: 0` and possibly `privileged: true`*. *Also note the Kibana changes required to trust the Elasticsearch CA*
```
